Deliverable:
-------------

1. Print prompt '$>' on begin and on completion of each query.
2. Process CREATE table requests and generate schema in Java.
3. Load data from CSV file in table generated above.
4. Implement SELECT queries and nested queries.
5. Implement AS feature.
6. Extensible model to support future changes like aggregate functions and joins.
7. Use tools provided to identify query type, fields, operators and tables.
8. Parse input query into RA tree. 

Info:
1. Data present in CSV
2. Use '|' as delimiter,  Dates are stored in YYYY-MM-DD form.

Q. From where to load CSV files ?
   The project document says that CSV file will be used to load data but it doesn't
   explain how the CSV file name be provided, will it be passed from cmd arguments,
   do we need to assume table name as CSV file name and try auto loading it ?
 Ans. "That means that the data directory contains a data file called 'R.dat' that might look like this "


Q. Are we using Set RA or Bag RA?   
Ans.   Bag RA
   
Q. What does A + B signitfy?

   
Design Notes:
-------------
1. Design should be modular and extensible.
2. It should support pluggable features like indexes (multi-layer cache, optimization features,
   Support for future enhancements, etc...
   
3. We need to return results in sorted fashion, this requires deciding whether to
   store data in sorted fashion or just sort the results.
      -- If we plan to store data in sorted fashion, it would mean sorting data
         every time an input happens which may be costly with large data sizes.
         The output results may be a smaller subset.
         However, data accessing costs may increase unless we employ indexes.
         
   Sneha:  Natural order is required only.    
   Gokhan: Sorting when with oprt  
         
         
4. As per class discussion, in future multiple data sources will be provided, these will
   represent our persistent storage.
   
   a). We need to assign a unique id to each record. Based on example input data,
       there is no unique field. This field will help us in indexing.
   b). This field will also represent the line number for each row.    
   
   - Indexing data can help us reduce response time. We can index data such that
     we can store the line range of each record. (Applicable only when input is 
     very large, I assume this in later checkpoints.)
   - Indexes will stay in memory for quick access.  
        
      --   We can do a pre-computation and generate indexes
           which can generate a hash of the primary key chosen in each table and 
           segment the entire data in virtual segments formed based on line numbers
           within each document, identified by field Lno.
           Example:  If we wish to access record of employee ID 123
           - We can get the segment range of the employee ID 123 say Lno (20-40).
           - We can then load these 20 lines in memory and work on record with
             employee ID 123.
         
          Pros:
          1. This approach will reduce the index size as we will be holding              
          
          Cons:
          1. Its not applicable when searching data by other fields
   
   Chunk retrieval:
   Rather than using volcano approach of fetching 1 record we can use the second 
   approach of retrieving multiple records in one iteration to balance I/O reads.
   
   Out of scope  
   This applies only when we are responsible for deciding tables.
   Normalization: Normalizing the data can help us in efficient retrieval and reduce
   the number of fields in each record.This will add the complexity of creating multiple tables.
    
   Q. How to do indexing? 

CREATE Table:
CREATE TABLE R (A int, B date, C string, ... )

App1:
1. On getting the given query, we parse the query using the parser and identify the
   Table name, field names and corresponding java types.
2. Create a class with name of table and said fields such that this class represents
   one row of the table.
   
   
 Q. How to spawn a class at runtime?
    Maybe reflection: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/2320404/creating-classes-dynamically-with-java
    
 Q. How to implement foreign key reference in the record?
 
TODO: Identify operation with joins and other scenarios
TODO: Identify extensibility

Gokhan: not suitable

Pros:
Modular

Cons:
Mandatory type conversion for each record field during load.

 
App2:
We parse create query and create a mapping
such that the key is an object of type Column
ColumnX{
  String colName;
  class type;
  Foreign key
  
}


Map<Column, Value>, this includes unnecessary heat
Map<Column, List<Value>>


So a representation of table holding say 100 records in memory.
chunk_size = 1 or 100
Gokhan: simple, 1


N
TableX_Chunk{
   String name;
   Map<ColumnX, List<Value>>
}
 
TODO: Identify operation with joins and other scenarios
TODO: Identify extensibility
 
Pros:
1. Quick access
2. Type conversion on demand.


Approach 3:

Store table schema in data structure

Map< tableName, TableData>

TableData{
  String tableName
  List<ColumnDef>
}  
  
1. For now we are holding the column definitions in a list and not a map, so
   that we don't lose the natural order of the column names.
2. This means that we have to iterate the column def list to find a particular 
   column.
   For now, it seems ok, if issues arise we can change it in future.   


ScannerObj
1. This class is responsible for reading data from file.
2. It will accept a table name and table schema and return a List of Objects.
3. It will read a chunk of rows from file, chunk defaults to 1, then parse each
   column value as per column definition and then store it in a list of objects.
4. It will then send this list to its caller who using the column defintion will
   type cast each column value.
   We expect typecasting cost to be less than string parsing at each level  


Q. How to convert from column definition to Java type a particular String.




Caching:
LRU

TODO: How to create execution plan
Approach1:
Create a Binary tree where each node contains the Operator (parent class for each
operator type). It holds left and right child based on its subtypes as per slide
Once tree is created, its root is passed for processing where each node operator
calls its child and so on till we reach leaf node. 

Data is processed at each level and then passed to parent.

Example: SELECT A, B, ... FROM R
Here the select is actually a Projection of columns A and B from table R
A tree will be created which will identify the operator as Projection and Scanner

  Project (A, B)
    |
  Scanner (R)   

Once the tree is created, it will be passed to the query processor
This will invoke the root of the tree and do say process()
The root operator here is Project, this will first invoke its left and right
child nodes. 
Here it has only one child - Scanner. Scanner will find that it has no children
and will start processing data, one line at a time.
The project will receive this data and do a projection of column A and B
Q. The node has operator, operator type and children, where will the node get the
   query?
   Each node's operator will hold that info. Each operator will have query and 
   know its specific attributes to work on.
   Like Project operator is designed such that it holds a list of columns it needs
   to project
   
Example 2: SELECT R.A, ... FROM R WHERE R.A > 5
Here we have three operators, 
   Project (R.A)
     |   
   Select (R.A > 5)
     |
   Scanner (R)
   
Example 3: SELECT Q.C, ... FROM (SELECT A, C, ... FROM R) Q WHERE ...

      Project (Q.C)
        |
      Select (Where)
        |
      Project(A, C)
        |
      Scanner(R)        
   
Here we see that column definitions are changing, which means once we return
a result of inner query, we need to update the column definitions to reflect
changes   






Pros:
1. We can process data at no added cost then approach2
2. We can use this model later for rebalancing RA for optimization.
3. Allows us to identify atomic operations like two children of one node and 
   can try using multi threading for performance.
   
Cons:
Complex design, may turn out to be a futile effort.   

Approach 2:
We process the statment by breaking it into parts and calling simultaneously

Pros:
Simple design

Cons:
Will bite us once we introduce optimization.








TODO: How to use eval Lib

 
Execution Plan (RA)
Q. How to create RA tree? 
Q. How to analyze the RA tree and minimize it??


Identifying and evaluating an expression
-------------------------------------------
JSQLParser provides several visitor interfaces which can be implemented such that
a type of visitor will invoke the particular method or query type that qualifies

Query: Select A, B from R;
In this example, we pass this query through a Statement Visitor which identifies it
as a select query and invokes the corresponding method.
Now within this method, we invoke call to a Select Visitor which is also a SelectItem Visitor.
This identifies that the query is a PlainSelect and not a Union.

In the PlainSelect we presently try to find out 3 components
                      ---------
1. SelectItems
2. FromItems
3. Where/Expression

SelectItems
-----------
Here each select item is a SelectExpressionItem, such that they have an expression,
a string alias, a table
In our case for the example query, the expression in the SelectExpressionItem is
an instance of column, which contains the column name

However, an expression can be a subselect or maybe an arithmetic expression
example: SELECT A + B FROM R;

Presently we pass the list of select items to the Projection Operator, assuming that
each SELECTItem is a column expression.
Q. Should the ProjectionOperator be passed the expressions in each select item
   and the operator may itself be made as an expression visitor?
   This levies 2 responsibilities on the Projection operator to identify the expression
   type and the do projection over it
   But it allows it to decide what and how to project

Q. What if the expression in the projection is itself a subselect?
   Ideally at the time of tree generation we should concretely identify the operator
   to be used at each step and not at execution level.
   This means that a projection operator should be assigned an expression when
   we know it is something in the realm of projection only.
   
One thing that can be done is that, we can check each expression and see if its
instance of subselect, function. If this is the case we can invoke a new instance
of SelectQueryVisitor and call its getRoot and append it to the root of the current
SelectQueryVisitor.
If its not instance of subselect or function, we can add it to the list of expression
for Projection. In projection, when evaluating an expression, it will check each
expression type and process it accordingly.
Say it has two expressions, A, (A + B)
Then projection will select column A and add another column (A+B) which will have
the addition evaluation performed on the value A and B.

The same can be followed for SELECT or WHERE, here also if its a simple evaluation
it will be passed to the operator who will process it accordingly or passed to
a new instance to generate a new node.
        

ALIASES
-------
SELECT A+B AS C, ... FROM R
SELECT Q.C, ... FROM (SELECT A, C, ... FROM R) Q WHERE Q.C > 1
SELECT A+B AS C, ... FROM R WHERE C > 1
SELECT R.A, S.A FROM R, S WHERE R.A = S.A


We observe that all our current operators can have aliases, be it selection, 
projection and scanner.

Case 1: SELECT A+B AS C, ... FROM R
This is simple, we have an expression with alias, in columncell we can add a new 
field called relation id which will correspond to the alias value
when we evaluate this expression in operator visitor, addition will check for
any alias associated with the expression and append its id in the new column
cell that it creates


CASE 2: SELECT Q.C, ... FROM (SELECT A, C, ... FROM R) Q WHERE Q.C > 1

This one's tricky. Now first we process the subselect as its the lowest part
of the tree. When project its result, the tuples returned by it should be appended
with relation name as Q. 
Q. who will do this append?
     project (Q.C)
        |
     select (Q.C > 1)
        |
     project(A, C)
        |
     scanner(R)         

once the fromitem visitor finds that the query is a subselect, it will delegate it to
the next operator for node generation. Once the child node is returned back to
fromitemvisitor it needs to somehow encode the information in the node that the
result is of type Q, such that when this child node returns its results, it
appends to the result tuples, the relation name as Q, and each tuple in turn
updates its column cells, that alias is now Q.

when the parent select opn now seaches for column, it will look for alias/table
name and then column name. The map for the visitor should also be able to
store value not just by column name but by alias or table name and column name.
Hence a new structure needs to be created to be used as key which happens to be
comparable as well.

CASE 3: SELECT A+B  ... FROM R AS C WHERE C.A > 1
The earlier case should cover this.















   
   
   
   
 









             
